When you were a kid and your parents, how was growing up and what were your parents like?
Oh, well, I had a bit of a saddish growing up because when I was about, I'd say, eight, eight years old, something like that,
my mother had a nervous breakdown and remained in hospital for a good few years. So it was my father that was bringing me and my brother up.
That must have been hard.
Yeah, it was hard for my father. As a matter of fact, my father was my brother's stepfather because my mother had been married to her first husband and had my brother.
And then later on she had me, but in them days after we'd so long for a divorce. And when my mother did get divorced, she married my father.
But she'd already had me then. So there was a serious difference between me and my brother.
And that's when, you know, we did live here in the bay, me going to St Mary's School and my brother.
But, you know, I more or less grew up with my father, the two of us up. So later on, I did go down with my aunt and uncle to live with me and my brother.
Where was that then?
So, you know, I had a happy childhood, you know, going to St. Louis School. I went to live with my aunt and uncle at the age I was just getting on for 12.
I was 12 years old in February. But until then, because my father had been called to see when 1939, the war broke out.
And he was taken away and was left with a good friend of ours that was living in the house.
And which my father left me in charge, you know, the lady who took care of me, because my brother was working then.
And that had happened. My father, I don't think he was out to sleep for long when he was taught pedo twice.
And my father ended up as prisoner of war.
Yeah, people forget merchants seeming were prisoners of war.
Oh yes, well then, my brother, I'll tell you about, he lost his life. My brother Freddie, on his first trip to sea during the war,
he was so intent on getting on a ship, which he joined with my cousins, the brother, the son of my aunt and uncle I was living with.
The two of them joined the ship with my cousin, which was my aunt's son, even my brother.
There was only a day's difference between their birthdays. 17 years old, and my brother was so intent on going to sea.
My cousin, who was with him, he'd already done, I think, a trip or two.
But when they joined the ship, put the docks here, my cousin asked my brother to come off the ship, because it was like an old boat, he said.
And of course, this was like the war was raging then.
And my cousin came off and my brother stayed on the ship and it was torpedoed. My brother was lost at sea.
It was only that they hadn't even been out. I got all the details of the ship, where it was sunk, the German submarine that torpedoed them.
I have three megalos for my brother. So he was lost, because he'd already left what we call a denudation allotment for my aunt, for somebody to take care of me.
But we never even drew the first allotment. I remember the telegram came in my name to my aunt's house.
I think I was 15 then, or 14. And the telegram came to me, because I was his next of kin, to say that they were missing at sea, presumed dead.
And I got all the particulars here about the sinking of my brother's ship.
And there was also a boy that was in my class. He was only 14, because he was in my class and my brother was three years older than me.
And he went down on the ship with my brother. And another boy, a good friend of my brother's, they were both learning to play the guitar.
I have a picture here of them, it said going on the Woodson Street. And that friend of his, he was on the ship as well.
So there were three, you know, from my school that went down on that ship. I think it's our hill.
I mean, that's the thing, people don't get it. Yes, people went to war in the army, but you could be 14 and die on the merchant. You couldn't be 14 and join the army.
Yeah, I've got a list of all the people that went down on that ship, on the SS Whitestone.
Also, I've been to Tower Hill and seen the plaques. And yeah, it's sad that most of the men were from Cardiff that went down on that ship.
Got all their names, names of them, their mothers, you know.
And it would all have been Cardiff families.
So when a ship went down that went off at Cardiff, and I mean, as you say, with the torpedoes, a load of ships was sunk near the Bristol Channel. They didn't even go in there.
Oh yeah, yeah. I think they were heading. I'm not sure if it was New Zealand or somewhere like that.
But I got all the details here, you know, from the journey they were taking.
But they sailed, well, I'd say they'd been out to Cardiff for two weeks or whatever when they were atop the coast. Yeah, so that was my brother I lost.
So what was the surname then? What was your brother's surname?
My brother's surname was Frederick William Johnson.
Johnson. So because that was that a family name or that was his first dad's name?
That was his. My mum was married to his father. Yeah.
I think his father's name was William Johnson. Right.
I got birthed into the kids, you know, my mother's marriage lines and that.
So what was your first, what was your original name then Laura?
I was always known as Laura Savage. Right. My mother married my father.
You know, when a divorce came through, she married my father.
So I've always been known as Laura Savage. But at one time when I went to get a birth certificate,
and my mother wasn't married to my father at the time she had me.
Originally, I should have been known as Laura Johnson. Yeah.
Because I remember I went to when I was working and we used to have not an original birth certificate.
You could always get a birth certificate if you were working in a factory or something like that.
And the factory I was working in, I went to the registry office for a birth certificate and gave them my name.
And they searched and searched for this birth certificate for Savage, my name, Laura Savage.
I was named after my mother. And I remember the lady came down.
She said, you know, she couldn't find my name, my name. What was my mother's maiden name?
And that's when they found out. And I always remember I tell a few of my friends now.
She came back and she said, you know what? She said, your name is Laura Johnson.
She said, because when my mother had me and registered me, I had to be registered in my mother's name, you see,
because she wasn't married to my father at the time. Yeah.
I remember, I remember the day my mother got married in Loughnose Square Methodist Church.
And I had come from, I was going to some early school then in the primaries.
And I can remember coming home from school and where is my mother and my father and the lady,
because it was always you had two rooms, you know, one room down then two rooms up and whatever.
And wherever you lived in Canal Peray, the lady of the house, I think someone was left there,
because they were having a bit of a reception. I didn't know at the time.
And when I came home, you know, looking for my mum and dad, the lady said to me, your mum got married this morning.
And I can see it now. I tell all my friends. And I thought, so I left the house because I know my mother
was a very good-natured and very nice and very nice member of the West Alley,
of the Square, the Sisterhood and everything. And I went now looking and here was my mum and my father
coming from the church, almost reaching the house where we lived. And they were coming back, I mean,
after being married, I think I was six years old then. But I can remember that day like it was yesterday.
So then I was going to Samaritan School then, a primary. Well then a few years after that,
my mum, what we would call today a nervous breakdown, because my nan always told us a story.
When my mother was young, it was a fairground they had in Wood Street when my mother was like a teenager.
And she had a fall out of a swinging boat. And it must have fallen. She was injured.
And my nan always said, they told her the size, that my mother, something would happen with her.
But if she was all right, she'd be saved at 21. See if she was okay by then.
But it must have came on her, you know, a few years later. And today it would be called a nervous breakdown.
And get some treatment for it. But my mother at that time, you know, you went to hospital stay.
My mother used to come out occasionally, but then go back. But my dad took a good rough name of bringing us up.
Until we went to my aunt and uncle to live. And then my father was taken to his reward.
Was it, when you went to live with your aunt and uncle, was that far or was it local or?
Oh no, it was just, at the time that I was living, when my father left me and my brother, where we were,
because my father was the tenant of the house, and when he left to go to sea,
he signed it over to this family that we knew that had taken rooms in the house with us.
So my father signed over the tenancy to the lady, Mrs. Jason, you see.
So then when I went down to live with my aunt and uncle, I was just going out for 12.
And my brother was 15 then. He was working, my brother. He had a job working in, he'd also, before that, he had joined the Air Force cadets.
I've got a picture of him in his Air Force uniform, cadet uniform.
And of course, back in the third, civil to three, he packed everything up.
The cadet, on his job, he was working in a place in here in Canal Parade.
It was a ladder firm called Farnall. And my cousin, the two of them, of course we were in the house together,
my aunt and uncle's son, and that was my cousin, Joey.
Joey and Freddie, they both were from Farnall. Another place.
He had a job, so of course, getting the urge to go to this, let's see, and went and never returned.
So my father was taken. In the meantime, that's why we had to go down with my aunt and uncle to live,
because no money was coming in. Like the allotment my father had left to the lady for me at Seast.
Of course, he was taken prisoner of war, so there was no money coming for me.
After my aunt and uncle said, you know, that lady can't be taken care of, one of them, you know, Freddie was working,
because she had children of her own. So my aunt and uncle, who we were very close to, you know, because my mother's sister,
and he said, you know, then children got to come down with us.
So where did your aunt and uncle live?
Down in Stewart Street.
Ah, right, so still in the bay.
Oh yeah, only ten minutes away from where we were, yeah.
Because it would have been so much worse if you had to move completely.
Oh yes, and plus I had aunts all around, you know, because my mother was in Grains Town, and my nana's house was in Grains Town.
My nana had passed away then, but of course that is a family house. My aunt lived there until she died.
And I had a few aunts, you know, scattered around.
Big family then?
No, my mother had four sisters, and before Donald, you know, my mother had three sisters and two brothers.
Right, so how was school then? How was school?
Oh school, I was in St Mary's in the primary.
Yeah.
And I think I left St Mary's when I was about seven, something like that.
And then we did have a time, at that time you moved from one house to another, me and my father and my brother.
And at one time we did move, my aunt and uncle, this was before they moved to Stewart Street, they lived in Homesdale Street.
I can remember we went down there to live, me and my brother and my father, we went to the same house, my aunt and uncle.
And then eventually we came back up and we were living in Albert Square.
Right.
So, you know, most of my life was spent in that period when I went down to Grange Town, because I was in Grange Council.
I think it must have only been for about a year or something like that.
And then, like when I came back, I went to South Jersey School.
I went to South Jersey School from the time I was, oh, I think it was about, I think it was about ten when I started in South Jersey School.
You know, like the children change now, at age 11 they go to another school.
I think I was about, it comes from Grange Town then, I went to South Jersey School.
From the time I was about 10 or 11 until I left at the age of 14.
Right.
I still got my leaving school card, I found here a few years ago.
I should ask you, when your dad was a prisoner of war, what was it like when he came back?
Now, my dad wasn't a prisoner of war in Germany.
The only proof I've got is, of course, my father was West African, you see.
And when he was a prisoner of war, the only proof I've got is prisoner of war in French New Guinea.
Right.
See, he wasn't a prisoner of war in Germany, French New Guinea.
I've got a letter here, the only proof I have got, and of course, me being young at the time,
I don't know, I've still got these letters, still, you know, I've kept them, you know, whatever.
The only proof I've got is a letter that my father had sent, addressed to me,
must have gone to the house when I was living with my aunt, that's when my father was imprisoned.
That somebody had wrote for, because, you know, my father used to sign the cross, you know.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And this was a letter someone had written, and it was to me, you know, it was my father's statement.
This person had written the letter for my father, and asking that, I think,
it was like my brother to take care of me, something to that effect.
And I got the address, you know, the top of the letter.
Right.
The person had written, and my father had got his cross at the bottom.
And that's the only proof I've got that my father was in this prison of war camp, you know.
Yeah.
That's better, that's better.
Oh, I don't.
And I would tell him to write down.
You're okay now, I can hear you again.
Okay.
You were saying about your father, the guy wrote the letter for him.
Yeah, this is like my dad's words to him, you know, he must have been saying, you know,
he must have asked the chap, you know, send this to my daughter, you know.
Right.
To tell me we're all right and whatever.
And if we could, to send something out of that, I don't know if it was, you know,
like clothes or food stuff, anything like that.
I could show anyone what I've got here.
Did your father come home?
Oh, yes, he came home.
Yeah.
And it was a funny thing because he was a sick man before he left.
But of course they were taking anyone, you know.
He'd been home from sea for years, you know, looking after us children.
But yes, he came home and he was home for about, he came home,
I think he was home for about two years when he died.
He did do, when he came home, he went back to sea because he died at sea, my father.
Right.
On I think about the second trip on a ship he was on and he died at sea.
You know, I've got my father's certificates, you know, from when,
because he left me a little bit of money.
Yeah.
Because before he joined the ship that he died on, I was 15 at the time, a teenager.
But we used to, we had a club in Glutony there where we used to go dancing, you know,
as a teenager.
Yeah.
And he knew you always find me there, you know, after like the evening time.
And before he joined the ship the day before, he came to find me because I was still living down with my aunt and uncle.
And he came to see me before he went because his last words was, he told me, he said,
if he didn't come back, I can remember saying to him, oh, don't say that, Dad.
He said, if I don't come back, he told me what to do.
He left a message.
I have to go to these solicitors.
Right.
And after that, he didn't come back.
And then after getting in touch with the solicitor, who was my co-in-law at the time in Working Street,
and my dad had left me some money.
Right.
And of course I had some assets.
As a matter of fact, my mother had passed away at the time.
And it was from this money that my father left me that I paid for my mother's funeral.
Yeah.
So, is that all?
Not an easy upbringing at all, was it?
Let's be fair, Laura.
I'm not saying, I mean, it wasn't easy, but...
Oh, no.
It was hard for everybody, wasn't it?
It was hard for everybody.
Yeah.
I've caught up with the mum and dad.
I can remember all the times with my mother.
Oh, she was great, my mother.
There's not many who remember my mother, but there was one person, she always just said to me,
I remember your mother, Laura, she was such a docile woman.
You know, your mother is a quiet woman.
Yeah, I can remember.
Yeah, my mum used to take us to the house.
I always went to Sunday school.
And on a Sunday evening, I'd be in the Square Methodist for them, the evening service, every Sunday with my mum.
Yeah.
So, let's jump a bit.
Did you go on the school trips?
Not on school trips, no, but on the Woodson Street.
Yeah, the Woodson Street. Yeah, the church trips, yeah.
The Woodson Street from Lowes Square.
I got a picture here of the lorries taking them.
My brother is on it, and one or two boys from school.
You know, this was more or less like most of the boys that went to South Jersey school.
And from Lowes Square Methodist, most of us in the Gales and Boys Life Brigade.
But I've got a picture of them on the truck, you know, just outside leaving to go on the Woodson Street.
And we used to think it was so nice.
We'd be stuck in a field maybe, I think at other times, I think there was landlion or something like that.
Oh, we thought it was such a posh place, you know.
And we'd be stuck in a field with all cows in the next field, and whatever.
And oh yeah, every year we'd have the Woodson Street and have our races and everything.
That was from Lowes Square. Of course, a lot of the kids went to the mission in Angelina Street, you know.
That was their Sunday school.
And then you had Samaritan's Church, you know, that was all three churches at the time, the Bay Area.
Of course, Samaritan's is still going strong.
Lowes Square was knocked down, and now it's just a small place, St Paul's Church.
People say about how actually elegant the houses were in Lowes Square.
Well, Lowes Square Church, I don't think I've got any pictures of it.
There were no pictures around. Oh, that was a big church, yes.
I can remember going there when we'd put the Magic Lansons, but we used to pay a penny to go to.
That was the first time we ever seen, honestly, Magic Lansons.
Those houses were big old houses as well, weren't they?
Oh yeah, them houses they reckon, you know, were owned by doctors and people at those ship-holding.
Oh yeah, they were elegant houses.
There were two sides there, they had basements, you know.
Well, there were three sides that had basements, because we had our park.
We had our park right in the middle of Lowes Square.
That park that we had, it had a fountain in the middle, and that fountain was very deep.
You know, it was it rained all around, but it was very deep that fountain.
You saw to it went up a bit of a hill, and you climbed, so you got to the railing.
And then, you know, there's no way you could get there unless you wanted to jump in and drown yourself.
That was a beautiful park.
And then later on in the years, they put some, we did have a stream,
and then later on they put more rides for us there, you know.
I can remember when we used to come from school, and about, say, about five o'clock, or about five,
the boys, now and again, they'd have a boxing match, and a ring would be put up.
I can remember a few of the boys, and they'd have a boxing match, you know, with two of the boys,
or, you know, a few volunteering to fight each other.
Oh, we had some lovely school days there, mind, told in the day.
I mean, so many people were related, and families going back as friends for years.
Oh, but regardless whether you was related or not, I mean, everyone's door was open,
and everyone was auntie, your aunt, your uncle.
As soon as next door to someone, they were always auntie, and as they sent you to the shop,
you didn't want to go, you would have to go, you know.
There's no way you could say no, you're not going, or whatever like that.
And then people were so generous, you know, we'd have a butter,
they'd hate me to go into the shop, or whatever.
But, oh yeah, it was a community, it was fantastic.
I mean, someone described it to me as the village in Cardiff, you know, and it was more like a village than...
Oh yeah, it was cosmopolitan, I'd say, you know, all nationalities.
So we had all nationalities there.
We had, well, from what you call almost fellies down to a pierhead,
but they reckon that's all, from Customs Street is a mile, I think they call that, the Rock One Mile.
And from that one mile, my good with me, down the bottom of George Street,
you had the Spanish, you had the Maltese, more or less inside the bay,
you had the Africans and the Similes, it was mostly there.
But we had Maltese, and then we also had a Norwegian...
what's the name on each street there?
Norwegian Church, you know, and then that moved.
No, not Church, that was a Norwegian home.
That was bombed.
I was stood outside at the night, because during the war, time didn't mean anything.
It must have been like two or three in the morning, after the rage,
we'd all be out looking and finding out what was bombed.
I can remember the night that was bombed, the Norwegian home.
I can remember looking at it, seeing the bomb had long fallen and killed people there.
And I can remember being outside, just looking at that crate that's moving,
where the bomber dropped and killed the people, a lot of Arabs, the Norwegian club,
and an Arab boarding house and cats, where people, even a little girl,
knew the bloke in Sapphire Street here.
She was at one of the houses when the asylum went, and couldn't get back home to her old house.
And as a matter of fact, she was killed that night, I can picture her now, little William.
She was just one child that was killed, whether trying to make her way home,
for some reason, I don't know if it was because that house just missed the bomb.
Just in the wrong place at the wrong time.
Yeah, she was killed that night, little William.
And we had air raid shelters all along huge street.
You could still see the marks in the wall, that wall on the left side of huge street,
where the shelters were.
We had shelters, we had all numbers drawn, shelter number 8, number 9, number 7.
Well, there were times when we got to more or less sleep all night in the shelters.
When I went down the docks to live in my aunt's house, we had an Anderson shelter up at the back,
one of the corrugated ones.
And that's where we tried to go there, went there.
It's either under the table or in the cupboard under the stairs, when the sirens went.
But well, I was a teenager then, and we used to go to an instant even, school there, on a Friday.
They'd have a dance and a speedy.
And I can remember when we were caught one night when a siren went to me and my cousin.
My cousin was Joey, I had another cousin, like my mother.
My aunt had a boy, Joey and Iris.
And my cousin Iris was about maybe 18 months older than me.
And of course we used to knock it out together.
And coming home one night when the siren had gone, the Germans were bombing us.
And we had to make our way back down to Stewart Street, not a hand in front of you, you know, on the black house.
Not a light could be shone.
And we had to make our way back down because we were going from shelter to shelter, trying to get our way home.
And I said, for all that, it was when you think about it, it wasn't thrilling because the army was stationed at the city hall.
And of course we used a drone of the German bombers.
And it was a bit exciting because you've got the searchlights searching in the sky, you know, to get the planes.
And then you hear the attack guns going.
Oh yeah. It was dangerous. It was rough.